=head1 NAME

DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Glossary - Terms used in DBIx::DataModel documentation

=head1 DOCUMENTATION CONTEXT

This chapter is part of the C<DBIx::DataModel> manual.

=over

=item * 

L<SYNOPSIS AND DESCRIPTION|DBIx::DataModel>

=item * 

L<DESIGN|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Design>

=item * 

L<QUICKSTART|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Quickstart>

=item *

L<REFERENCE|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Reference>

=item *

L<MISC|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Misc>

=item *

L<INTERNALS|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Internals>

=item *

GLOSSARY

=back



=head1 GLOSSARY

=over

=item API

Application Programming Interface, the set of public attributes,
methods, arguments, return values for interacting with a software 
compnent.

=item association

Relationship between tables. 
In L</UML>, an association declaration states what are the 
participating tables, what are the L<multiplicities|/multiplicity>,
and optionally gives names to the association itself and to the
roles of the partipating tables.
An association declaration in C<DBIx::DataModel> involves similar 
information, except that no more than two tables can participate,
and role names are mandatory.

=item composition

An L</association> which additionally states that records of one
table (components) cannot exist outside of their composite class;
therefore when the composite is destroyed, the components must
be destroyed as well (cascaded delete).

=item column

Within a L</row>, a column is a scalar value 
corresponding to a given column name. 
Within a L</table> or L</view>, a column is a 
a list of scalar values obtained by selecting the
same column name in every row of the data source.
Unlike most other Perl L<ORMs|/ORM>, 
C<DBIx::DataModel> has no class for
representing a column: since a row is just 
a blessed hashref, a column is just a value in that hashref.
As a matter of fact, most columns are unknown to
the C<DBIx::DataModel> layer; they are just 
passthrough information, directly propagated from the 
L<DBI|DBI> layer to the application layer.

=item column type

A collection of callback functions or I<handlers>, 
declared in a L</schema> through the 
L<ColumnType|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Reference/"ColumnType">
method. This column type can then be associated with
various column names in various tables; as a result, 
the C<fromDB> and C<toDB> handlers will be called 
automatically, respectively  after reading a value
from the database or before writing a value to the database.


=item compile time

Strictly speaking, Perl is not a compiled language; 
but liberally speaking, the code that runs in the initial
phases of a perl program (BEGIN, CHECK, INIT) can be named
"compile time". 

Within C<DBIx::DataModel>, we speak of "compile-time methods"
for declarations like C<Schema(...)>, C<Table(...)>, 
C<Association(...)>, because these declarations
usually belong to a module that will be
loaded through L<use|perlfunc/use>, and therefore will be 
executed at compile-time. By convention, compile-time
methods start with an uppercase letter.


=item DB

DataBase

=item DBI

The generic database-independent interface for Perl -- see L<DBI>.

=item DBIC

Abreviation for L<DBIx::Class>, another L</ORM> for Perl.

=item dbh

A DBI database handle, created by a call to L<DBI/connect>.

=item fast statement 

A L</statement> for which the method 
L<reuseRow|DBIx::DataModel::Statement/"reuseRow"> has been called :
each row from the database will be retrieved into the same memory
location, using DBI's L<fetch|DBI/fetch> and
L<bind_columns|DBI/bind_columns> methods. This is the fastest way to
get data, but it requires special care to handle each row immediately,
before that row gets overwritten by the next row.



=item foreign key

A column or set of columns that contains the primary key
of another table.


=item inner join

The default form of L</join>, that excludes null values
in the join condition. 
Within C<DBIx::DataModel>, inner joins are inferred automatically
from the L<multiplicities|/multiplicity> in L<associations|/association>,
or may be explicitly required with a bidirectional arrow: 
C<< ->join(qw/table <=> role1 <=> role2/) >>.

=item JDBC

Standard API to access databases from Java code.
Perl code can work with JDBC databases through the L<DBD::JDBC> proxy driver.

The JDBC API is richer than standard DBI for working 
with result sets : for example it has methods to move the cursor;
these can be exploited from C<DBIx::DataModel> through the 
L<DBIx::DataModel::Statement::JDBC|DBIx::DataModel::Statement::JDBC>
subclass.

=item join

A database operation which consists of taking rows from several sources
and producing new data rows. The result contains columns merged from 
those sources, according to the L</join condition>.
See the 
L<join method|DBIx::DataModel::Reference/join>.

=item join condition

A rule which states which rows from one source will be merged with 
which rows from another source while performing a join.
A typical join condition states that the
L</foreign key> of the first table should match the L</primary key>
of the second table.


=item left join

A particular form of L</join>, in which a row with an empty L</foreign key>
participates in the final result (while a regular join would ignore
that row).
Within C<DBIx::DataModel>, left joins are inferred automatically
from the L<multiplicities|/multiplicity> in L<associations|/association>,
or may be explicitly required with a directed arrow: 
C<< ->join(qw/table => role1 => role2/) >>.

=item multiplicity

A specification on one side of an L</association>, which
states the minimum and maximum number of times any given record 
may participate in the association. Typical multiplicities
are C<0..*>, C<0..1>, C<1..1>, C<1..*>. 
C<*> is a shorthand for C<0..*>, and 
C<1> is a shorthand for C<1..1>.


=item OO

Object-Oriented.

=item ORM

Object-Relational Management system : a 
framework of classes and methods
to encapsulate interactions with a L</RDBMS>.
C<DBIx::DataModel> is one of several ORMs for Perl.

=item primary key

A column or set of columns that uniquely identifies any 
single row within a table.

=item RDBMS

Relational DataBase Management System.

=item role method

A method automatically installed in a L</table> class
when an L</association> is declared. Role methods
are used to get access to related records in other tables.


=item role name

In UML notation, each side of an association may be decorated with a
"role name". These are optional in UML, like many other modeling constructs;
they are used mainly when a same class participates in several associations,
and disambiguation is necessary. 
However, when declaring an 
L<association|DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Reference/"Association">
in C<DBIx::DataModel>, role names are mandatory, because they 
are used to generate methods for navigating between
the two participating classes.

=item record

Synonym to L</row>.

=item row

A single data record resulting from a SELECT query to the RDBMS.
Within C<DBIx::DataModel>, rows are plain hashrefs 
(C<< { column_name => column_value } >>), blessed as instances of 
a L</table> or a L</view>.

=item schema

A subclass of L<DBIx::DataModel::Schema|DBIx::DataModel::Schema>, that
holds information about its tables, views and associations, and
encapsulates a L</dbh>.

=item source

Either a L</table> or a L</view>.

=item SQLA

Abreviation for L<SQL::Abstract>, the SQL generator module
used by C<DBIx::DataModel>.


=item statement 

An instance of L<DBIx::DataModel::Statement|DBIx::DataModel::Statement>, 
that encapsulates an SQL query. 
See L<DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Design/"STATEMENT OBJECTS">.


=item sth

A DBI statement handle, created by a call to L<DBI/prepare>.


=item table

A subclass of L<DBIx::DataModel::Table|DBIx::DataModel::Table>, 
created by method L<DBIx::DataModel::Schema/Table>, 
that encapsulates access to a database table (or database view).


=item UML

The I<Unified Modeling Language>, a graphical notation 
for modeling software system. 
Association declarations in C<DBIx::DataModel> 
closely reflect the way these are represented in UML notation
(see L<DBIx::DataModel::Doc::Reference/"Association">).


=item view

A subclass of L<DBIx::DataModel::View>, 
created either by a direct call to L<DBIx::DataModel::Schema/View>, 
or (in most cases) by a call to  L<DBIx::DataModel::Schema/join>, 
that encapsulates access to a database SELECT..FROM (typically 
a join between several database tables).

=back


